10 common myths about divorce.
Couples in the process
of splitting up
need to wise up,
say divorce lawyers.
We reveal how later in the show.
Merryn Somerset Webb joins us
to comment on the latest news
for investment trust investors.
Not all of it bad.
And can you save money and
still have a social life?
As the FT launches its
thrift off experiment,
Kate Bailey is in
the studio to discuss
how to spend wisely
and save in style.
Welcome to The Money Show,
the FT's weekly podcast
about personal
finance and investing.
I'm Claer Barrett, FT Money
editor bringing you this week's
news in downloadable form.
Have you been
watching The Split?
I'll confess.
I'm absolutely hooked on
this BBC One drama, which
follows the fortunes
and failures
of a group of high profile
divorce lawyers in London.
There have been some really
big shockers in the series.
And, sadly, this is also true
in real life as people commonly
make the wrong
assumptions about divorce
and, in particular, how your
finances stand to be split.
Joining me to discuss
is Lucy Warwick-Ching,
FT Money's digital editor.
Welcome, Lucy.
Hello.
Well, this got a
roaring response online,
not least because many of
the most powerful myths
about divorce concern adultery.
Tell me more.
Yes, that is the key word
that got people commenting
and reading the piece.
But there are some other
great myths in there, as well.
But, so, on the
topic of adultery.
So people often think that
because their partner has
committed adultery or they've
had an affair with somebody
else, it's hurt them
very deeply and it's
very key to their
feeling that they often
think that they're going to get
a bigger financial settlement.
But actually, this
isn't the case.
The courts recognise that
marriages break down.
And what the courts
are more interested in
is what resources you
each have available
and how they are to
be divided fairly.
So, unfortunately, if your
partner commits adultery
or behaves unreasonably,
you won't automatically
get a bigger settlement
for them to be--
for you to get a more
advantageous one,
you have to actually look at how
the party's behaviour has had
an impact on your
relationship, and file for kind
of unreasonable behaviour.
So that surprises
lots of people.
But while we're on the
subject of adultery,
the actual legal
definition rests
on this being committed with
a member of the opposite sex.
Yes.
This surprised everybody
that I mentioned it to.
It had people talking
about it in the office
and disagreeing about it.
So I had to really go
back to the lawyers
and really check this one out.
It's one of those
archaic English laws
that many believe to be-- quite
rightly so-- discriminatory.
But the way the English law
works at the moment is that it
only recognises adultery
between a man and a woman.
That said, the courts may
actually be sympathetic
because they do understand
that relationships
happen between lots
of different people.
And so if you take it to the
court and the judge looks
at your case, then they may
deem it to be unreasonable
behaviour.
So you won't automatically
be able to file for grounds
for divorce when
adultery is committed
with a member of the same sex.
Well, thanks for
clearing that up, Lucy.
But the article you
wrote on FT Money
cites the 10 most common myths.
And we've dealt
with two of them.
Read the piece for the rest.
But you also go into
another worrying aspect,
that divorcing couples
often don't think of.
Namely, their cybersecurity.
Yeah, many people share their
passwords with their spouses.
And then when everything's rosy
and the relationship is going
really well, this is fine.
But, actually,
they kind of forget
that when things
are going wrong,
that actually it's very
easy with devices these days
to look at something that your
partner has sent because it
may pop up on the screen.
Or in some cases,
high profile cases,
there's been examples
of where affairs
have come to light
because one partner sent
a text to the person they're
having an affair with
and it's popped up
on the family iPad.
Good grief!
And so yes.
Exactly.
So it's much more
important to not leave
yourself exposed online.
And one of the things
that really surprised
me was that people
could see e-mails,
you know, from your
divorce lawyer.
One was saying she had found
out because a password hadn't
been changed.
Yes.
Exactly.
But the thing to
be said actually
is don't be tempted to spy.
So although you may have access
to your partner's e-mails
or you may be able to log into
their WhatsApp or anything,
it's illegal to actually
access your partner's details.
You know, I mean, that--
that's quite obvious.
But it may be that people
might not really know about it.
And, actually, if you
do come across something
that you found in your
partner's online accounts, then
you won't be able to use
this in law against them.
And you also may end up with
a prison sentence or a fine.
Well, thank you very much
there to Lucy Warwick-Ching.
You can read her full
report online now,
The 10 Things You Ought to
Know About Getting Divorced
at ft.com/money.
I have to say, the
piece is excellent,
but the reader comments
of the bottom, oh, tasty.
Yes.
Thank you very much, Lucy.
Coming up on The Money
Show, your chance
to win a pair of tickets
to FT Weekend Festival,
worth 190 pounds.
Before that, many listeners
are fans of investment trusts.
Some of the oldest collective
investment vehicles
on the stock market, but oldest
doesn't necessarily mean best.
On the one hand, a
report out last week
showed that investment
trusts have consistently
outperformed other funds for
much of the past 20 years.
Hurrah.
However, rows about
fees are never far away
as FT columnist Merryn Somerset
Webb has been finding out.
And she joins me
on the line now.
Welcome, Merryn.
Hi, Claer.
So, first of all,
as an investor,
tell us why you love
investment trusts?
Well, I've always been a
fan of investment trust
because I love the
way that they can
hold very long-term capital.
You know, if you have
an open-ended fund,
when people want
to buy and sell,
you actually have to
buy and sell the assets.
In investment trusts,
the fund manager
never has to buy and sell
assets for short-term reasons.
They can just hold them
for a very long time
into as a pool of
permanent capital.
So that's very important.
I love the fact that
they have boards.
And I'm on a couple of
investment trust boards myself.
So I know what it
feels like to be there,
protecting the interests
of the end shareholders.
Boards don't always do what
they're supposed to do,
but they're there for
a specific reason.
I love that, as well.
Also, historically, they've
had lower charges overall,
and lower costs overall, should
I say, than open-ended funds.
But I've also always
had the feeling
that they tend for most
of the reasons I mentioned
to outperform over
the long-term.
Now, several studies
have been done into this,
but mainly by the
investment trust industry.
And that comes under "well, they
would say that, wouldn't they?"
So last week we had
the first report out
from a group of academics from
Cass Business School looking
at this properly to say,
well, let's actually try
and find out in a totally
neutral academic point of view
on whether these things
actually outperform or not.
So they've looked back
over the last 18 years.
So it's not super long-term.
But it's long-term enough.
And the results are rather more
exciting for investment trust
fans than you would even expect
it in that the performance gap
between open-ended funds
and close-ended funds--
so open-ended being the
unit trust most people buy,
close-ended funds referring
to investment trusts--
comes in at about 1.4% a year.
Now, that's real money.
Compound that over a
decade and you're talking
about an enormous difference.
Well, yes.
Exactly.
And it's all about compounding
for our readers who--
as we know--
like lock-and-leave investments.
They like to invest
for the long-term.
And they don't want
to be fiddling around
with their portfolios
all the time, making--
you know, chopping and
changing for the sake of it.
So this, I would imagine,
would be magic to their ears.
Well, absolutely.
I mean, there's lots of
caveats to it, of course,
as there is with all data.
Their research doesn't
take into account
every single closed-ended
fund because lots
are in sectors that can't be
compared with unit trusts.
So if you have infrastructure
funds and this kind of thing,
you can't compare
them across the board.
So it doesn't
include everything.
There's survivor bias.
There's-- you know, there's all
sorts of things in there that
make this data messy.
And, of course, it's
important to remember
that the average
investor does not
have the experience of
being in the average fund.
Of course.
So the average-- the
average open-ended fund
underperforms its benchmark
by 80 basis points a year.
0.8% per year.
Which is shocking, but most
people's portfolios don't do
that because they're--
particularly FT
readers, of course--
they're not stupid enough
to invest in rubbish funds
all the time.
So the average fund is not
the average experience.
And there's lots of
that stuff going on.
However, there does
seem to be something
that suggested an investment
trust over the long-term
can do better for you
than an open-ended fund.
And, again, I think that
comes back to the points
that I mentioned to you.
The role of directors, possibly
to better management skills,
who knows?
To the role of
[? gearing, ?] investment
trusts can borrow
money to invest.
It has a very small effect
on the performance numbers
on that, but it is there.
It's interesting research,
but another important caveat--
it is historical.
This is not about the future.
It is about the past.
And one thing that has happened
over the last decade or so
is that the costs of
a closed-ended fund
and an open-ended fund have
begun to come together.
And one of the things
that I suspect--
although the academics
don't bring this out--
but one of the things
I suspect has caused
a lot of the outperformance
of investment trusts
has been their lower cost.
Now as that margin narrows--
or has more than narrowed,
actually, in many cases--
we'll begin to see just how
long-term the differences are.
I suspect they'll remain,
but they won't be as big.
Well, on the subject of fees,
you wrote your FT column
last but one weekend ago
about the ongoing spat
between the board of the Invesco
Perpetual Enhanced Income
Trust, which is known as
IPE-- a bit of a mouthful--
and they have asked Invesco--
you are their investment
manager-- to reduce the
fees it charges them
with fairly disastrous results.
Yeah.
I'm writing about
these kind of things
all part of my campaign to
make myself really popular
in the financial industry.
And this is, I think,
taking me one step further--
one step further down that path.
But it's an interesting case
because one of the things
that investment trusts
have all had to do--
and, again, I say this from the
point of view of an investor,
I've done this, and
a director-- one
of the things
that's being really
important in the industry is
to bring these costs down.
To bring down management fees.
To make sure that
long-term performance
is not affected by high costs.
So all boards have been going
to their managers, the people
they delegate the management of
the assets to, and say to them,
look, do you know what?
Your costs are too high.
1% plus the performance fee.
We can't have it anymore.
We need all these fees
down below 1% a year.
Preferably below 60
basis points per year.
So the board of this
particular trust
did address this
with their managers.
And there are all sorts of
shenanigans in the middle
that it's quite hard
to get a handle on.
But the net result was
that rather than go ahead
with we're cutting
fees down to a level
that I think the board thought
they agreed, Invesco resigned.
And so there will now be
hopefully a [INAUDIBLE]
of some kind and a new manager.
The difficulty is, of
course, that Invesco
controls quite a lot of
the shares in the trust
and, therefore,
may have a chance
of being able to force through
the result that they want.
It's an interesting case,
partly because of the dynamic
between directors and managers.
And here we do see
directors doing--
or so it seems-- doing what
it is that we want them to do,
which is acting in the interest
of their end shareholders
by forcing down costs.
Hooray.
We're seeing pushback from
the fund management industry.
Not entirely unexpected.
And the third dynamic
that we're seeing here
is the issue of
shareholder democracy.
You know, if Invesco controls,
say 16% of the shares,
but manages to get their own
way by voting those shares--
and I don't know if they
will or won't, of course,
because at this point
it hasn't happened.
But if they were
able to use those 16%
to get their own
way with the trust,
then that would have, I think,
interesting implications
for shareholder
democracy in the sector.
And, of course, many of
the shares in that trust
are held by retail investors
through [INAUDIBLE] accounts,
because they own them on
online brokerage platforms.
So when that comes to--
when push comes to
shove on the vote,
it's actually very hard to
mobilise the votes of all
of those small investors.
Absolutely.
And this is something that
institutional and particularly
activists-- activists investors
in investment trust-- no,
I mean, I've--
I've been told recently
by several people
that the big activist
funds in the US,
et cetera, are careful when
they're targeting investment
trusts, go for investment
trust with very
high levels of retail
investors because they know
that the higher the
number of retail investors
there are, and not
ordinary investors like you
and me, the more likely
they are to be able to get
their way with a relatively
small number of shares
because we're so
hard to mobilise.
Because we're so, you know,
spread around the platform.
It's hard to do the
admin to get your vote
through on a platform,
et cetera, et cetera.
So, you know, we've become
effectively disenfranchised.
And that means that we
are not able to exercise
the democratic control we should
have over a lot of the things
that we own.
And that's not just true of
investment trusts, by the way.
It's true of pretty much every
listed share in the market.
Well, thanks very much there
to Merryn Somerset Webb.
You can read her column in the
money section of the FT weekend
newspaper this Saturday
about the outperformance
of investment trusts.
Or read her column online,
ft.com, from Friday morning.
Who would want to
be a millennial?
We are consistently told that
younger workers have never
had it so bad.
Depressed wages, less
generous pensions,
and, of course, a totally
unaffordable housing market.
Saving money rather than
spending it on avocados
is broadly the solution given
out by the popular press.
Well, we don't do hair
shirts on The FT Money show.
So we've started an
experiment this week
to hopefully prove that
saving money does not
have to be at the
expense of having fun.
Joining me now is my
colleague, Kate Bailey,
who writes a popular
millennial money column.
Welcome, Kate.
Hi, Claer.
So, firstly, can you explain
how this thrift off challenge
came about?
Well, this is part of the
FT's millennial moment series.
So, as you said, we
all know that saving
is a big worry for millennials.
We're a generation
struggling to save for homes,
facing a squeeze on earnings,
facing a worse pension future
than previous generations.
So we wanted to look
at how important
or just how important it is to
save small amounts over time
and how that can kind
of really build up
to fairly significant
sums over the long term,
and help with those
things like pension
pots and your investments.
But we wanted to look at it
in a bit more of a fun way.
So we decided that you and I
are going to compete for a week
and see who can have the
most fun on the least money.
Because we didn't really
want to just stay at home
with a tin of baked beans--
Exactly.
--because that doesn't feel
very millennial, either.
So, yes, we're going
to see which one of us
can beat the other by finding
the most inventive low cost
things to do.
Now, I should say at this point
I'm clearly not a millennial.
I'm 41 years old.
So, I'm probably a
little bit too young--
she says hopefully-- to be
a member of Generation X.
But I have always been good
at saving money nevertheless.
And I think that one advantage
that I might have over people
of your generation
is that my thrift
muscles are well-developed.
You know, you get used to
the habit of saving money.
And once you're there,
it never leaves you.
So maybe a lot of the things
I'm doing already-- like cycling
to work, making my lunch
everyday, which, let's face it,
I could afford to
go to Pret A Manger
and spend six pounds
on an avocado bloomer.
But, you know, I
don't want to do that.
I'd rather put the money
aside still and spend it
on a nicer holiday.
I mean, yes, that's
interesting because I
think I'm almost the opposite,
despite having been nearly cash
strapped for most
of my young life,
I think really my go-to habit
is a little more feckless.
So, without giving too
much of an advantage
to me, what are you
going to do over
the course of the next week?
Technology is going to
play a big part I think
in a lot of our decisions.
Yeah.
Definitely.
I mean, I think the key, isn't
it, is to do the kind of things
that we would want
to be doing anyway.
So I don't want to
stop going out--
No.
Even eating out, and
seeing my friends.
But, yeah, I have been
raking through the app store
to find kind of
useful apps that will
let me do all those things
either for free or just
for a cut price.
So, you know, things like--
things like open theatre, things
like seeing comedy or music,
going out for dinner,
and thrifty lunches.
So, yeah, the app store
has been my friend so far.
Excellent.
And I've also been starting
with making a budget.
So I've actually loaded 100
pounds onto my Monzo card.
Other ones are
available on the market.
But this is something that
is linked to my bank account,
but will give me a kind of
distinct wallet of money
to hopefully guide
my spending, and not
make me think, oh,
I can buy this,
because I've got an
unlimited amount of money.
And I do think like the boring
things, like setting a budget,
can be important.
Because if you
don't make a plan,
then what are you
going to stick to?
But equally, I've been
talking to friends-- again,
not millennial friends--
who are used to finding ways of
having fun on a limited budget.
One of the things
I'm going to try
is hosting a soccer club,
which is quite a funky thing.
Lots of people get
very excited about it.
It's basically going round
for dinner at a mate's house,
but a bit-- a bit
more organised.
And hoping they will
invite you round.
Well, yes.
[INAUDIBLE]
Exactly.
Otherwise, I'll be
down on the week.
But if readers have got
ideas for us to try out,
we're right at the
beginning of the week.
So there's still time
to send in your ideas.
Email us now money@ft.com.
And remember that the best
entry will win a pair of tickets
to the FT Weekend
Festival in September,
worth a cool 190
pounds, where you
will get to meet me,
no doubt Kate, and also
Merryn Somerset Webb, who
you heard from earlier.
And the full terms and
conditions are online
at ft.com/thriftoff.
Well, Kate, I'll give
you the last word.
Do you think you're going
to win this contest?
I'm getting calmly confident.
Yeah.
OK.
Well, we'll obviously be
writing all about this
and making a video for FT.com.
We'll bring you news of
that on a future podcast.
That's it from The Money
Show this week, however.
We will be back next
week at the usual time.
Goodbye.